---
title: "My First Toy Project: HDB Resale Price Predictor"
description: "Introduction to my first toy project where I try to use AI to predict HDB resale prices"
date: 2023-05-17T12:00:00Z
image: "/images/posts/02.jpg"
categories: ["project introduction", "hdb prices"]
authors: ["Kelvin Soh"]
tags: ["hdb", "kaggle", "introduction"]
draft: false
---

As I have found out while learning about web development (and as a lot
of people have pointed out), having a "toy project" is a really effective way
to learn. Rather than just blindly take the material provided in a course/tutorial,
we'd have to modify the concepts taught to suit our needs, promoting long term retention.
Also, having the toy project based on something I'm interested in keeps us more motivated.

As I'd be aiming to buy my first house later in the year, I'd be using AI to try to predict the HDB resale flat.
The idea is not very original: after all,
[one of Kaggle's ongoing competitions for newcomers](https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/house-prices-advanced-regression-techniques)
is to do exactly that (but for a different data set based in Iowa with 79 variables).

However, I find it a good enough idea to play around with. It has a very personal slant, and the data for this
project is [readily available](https://services2.hdb.gov.sg/webapp/BB33RTIS/). I'd be interested to see how things will work
for this, and when I'm done with the course will maybe apply the concepts I have learned to enter the Kaggle competition to see
how things stack up.

## The cover image

Generated by [Stable Diffusion Online](https://stablediffusionweb.com/).
I used the following prompts, and got something I like at the 8th attempt.

My first 7 attempts didn't produce the results I was hoping for
(either because my prompts weren't good enough or the output I'm aiming for is too complex)
so I gave up and went with something simple instead.

1. HDB prices going up
2. Singapore flat in the background with a chart showing items going up in the foreground
3. Housing price predictions
4. Housing price predictions HDB flats
5. Chart going up
6. Line chart going up
7. Buy buy buy hdb flats
8. HDB Flats
